Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Abraham Newman. He's professor at the
School of Foreign Service and Government Department at Georgetown
University. And today we're talking about his latest book
written together with a referral underground empire. How America
weaponize the world economy. So Dr Newman, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for having me.
So let me start perhaps with this question before
we get into details here. Why is it that
you call America an empire? What kind of empire
are we talking about here? Exactly.
Sure. So, um you know what we're trying to
get at is that uh America's power is not
just located in the traditional forms that we think
about which are often military or national power. Um
BUT it extends beyond its border and the way
that it extends are through these basic infrastructures of
uh capitalism. So things that people for decades really
hadn't focused on uh whether it's the dollar clearing
system, uh internet cables, um the way that uh
platform companies organize the globe, what we're trying to
use the the empire metaphor is to say, we
really need to think about us power, not just
as like state to state nations, but that it
extends through these from the core to the periphery,
through these economic networks. And that the US um
gets really remarkable power from it.
And, and so before we get into some of
the main kinds of technologies and services that uh
according to you played the role in the rise
of this new kind of empire. How far back
in history would you say we need to go
to really identify the foundations of this empire?
Sure. So, I mean, um the main focus of
the book is uh the Networks that evolved after
um you know, the Bretton Woods period. So, you
know, there's a up and through the 19 seventies,
economies are still mostly national. So you have national
banking systems, you have na you know, you have
ministries for telecommunications and telegraph if anybody remembers those.
Um And so then starting in the 19 seventies,
eighties, those things get loosened. We end capital controls,
companies get privatized. You have the whole wave of
liberalization, all of those things lead to the formation
of world spanning networks for finance, for production and
for information. And that accelerates in the 19 nineties.
And then with the, with the end of the
Cold War uh that they move from just being
western networks to global networks. And of course, the
the technological revolution of the internet, you know, it
really supercharges these things. Um And so, you know,
if you were going to kind of think about,
when did these networks start getting created? It's, it's
in those the 19 eighties, 19 nineties. Um BUT
they really accelerate in the two thousands.
So let's talk about some of these services and
technologies then how did the banking system evolve until
it became actually global?
Sure. So, you know, after world war two, many
of the Western countries, European countries, they don't have
functioning capital markets and most of the capital reserves
are in the United States. And so you start
to have uh you know, things like the Marshall
plan and the trade kind of the trade system,
it's relying on uh us reserves dollars to do
it and those dollars then to start to leak
out into the global system. And people take on
the dollar as this kind of uh medium of
exchange ways to do business. And so what, what
we talk about one of these um networks that
becomes very important for us power today is the
dollar clearing system. And it's a very, it's kind
of complicated thing, but it basically means if uh
a Japanese company and a German company, if they
do a sale with each other, they often do
that in dollars uh because it's easier than exchanging
euros for Yen. And um and so the way
that happens is that the, those companies have accounts
in what are called correspondent banks. Uh THEY'RE often
American banks and it's like a ledger and that
bank changes in the ledger, you know, there was
a sale from the German to the Japanese. Uh
AND it goes through that Correspondent Bank and that
means that the US through that system has a
lot of legal authority, not just over us banks,
but all those firms that are using the dollar
clearing system.
But is uh this happens in virtue of the
fact of transactions being made in dollars or is
it that America has some more direct influence over
the banking system in some other ways?
No, I mean, our story is often um you
know, the US government is not, it's not planning
this, it's not, doesn't realize what's happened. Um You
know, we have a chapter that's really focused on
the uh you know, we'll call them the, the
heroes of globalization. Uh THE people who thought they
were gonna create a world without governments, you know,
with beyond governments. Um And what they ended up
doing was create these economic networks that were global.
Um But they often concentrated their interactions in these
very large firms. Uh LIKE we focus on city,
for example, as one of those stories that we
tell and um the heads of that bank, they,
you know, they really thought they were beyond sovereignty,
beyond a nation, they were like pirates going out
creating this ocean of capitalism. Um But then they
refocused all of that power just in one company
and that's where the US government starts to realize,
well, if we don't need to control the world
or go, you know, to, to focus on every
company, we can just go at these core choke
point companies in the economy. Me who have so
much information and have become so vital uh to
interactions. Um And so we tell that story, Walter
Riston was the character that we tell about city.
But you can replay that with Amazon cloud services
or TS MC and the semiconductor production system. Um
IT kind of, you know, these networks that we
thought were so complicated and decentralized, rec centralized into
these few um or firms
that's very interesting. But even if it's, I if
it was not something that the US government or
any other institution planned beforehand right now, is this
something that people in the US government and other
government related institutions uh are aware of that they
have this sort of influence over the global banking
system?
Yes, I mean, so it uh in the book,
we really locate that as happening in response to
the 911 terrorist attack in the United States uh
where, you know, agencies across the US government were
tasked with kind of figuring out how could they
respond to this really unprecedented thing that they weren't
prepared for. Uh And what you see is agency
after agency that, that didn't maybe traditionally have the
type of role, discovers these maps and these networks
and realizes that um that they offer them an
opportunity to respond to this problem. And you know,
Treasury, which is primarily responsible for this domain. The
US Treasury Department, its core mission for decades was
to open markets, to liberalize, to not have government
control. Um AND it, it, but it is, it
has to respond to this crisis. And you see
a group in treasury realize how these networks, the,
the the com the um correspondent banking network, the
dollar clearing, which I just described. Um BUT also
the swift system uh which is uh uh we
can talk more about what that is, but it's
a kind of a encrypted post office for banks
that also provided a similar um uh entry point
into these powers. Um But at least the story
that we want to tell is that it's not
one where these, these bureaucrats have been planning all
the law and then the trap is, you know,
set it really, they're, they're in the cloud or
sorry, the fog of uh wicked problems and they're
struggling to figure out how to respond and they,
they see these opportunities and, and, and for us,
that's one of the reasons why we think there
needs to be more attention to this because it
um it, that kind of crisis response can lead
to the use of these powers in not maybe
the best planned ways.
Uh So we'll get into the US government response
to 911 in a second. But tell us a
little bit more about the swift system that you
mentioned there in banking. So why is it important
in this uh story, let's say
sure. So, um the basically, you know, banks have
to know uh who is supposed to give which
money to whom and how are they going to
do that in an organized way. And up until
the 19 seventies, they had a lot of just
bilateral interactions. There were a lot of, you know,
it's like I'll call you, I made this and
it was very complicated and as global banking increased,
um then there was this effort to rationalize that
to create some kind of centralized clearing house to
let people know um who sh where money should
be sent. And so then this cooper was created
um that's called Swift. It sits in Belgium and
it is a collective of global banks and it's
like a encrypted uh post office for uh the
banking system. They don't change. They, they're not responsible
for the actual money, but just the information about
which money should be transferred to whom. And uh
any transaction that goes over $10,000 in the world
is gonna go through the Swift system. And so
they have an incredible amount of information about financial
transactions and they also are really vital if you
want to be a global bank, you need access
to this information network.
A and so when it comes to the story
you are presenting in your book, uh does the
US also have some sort of access to that
information that passes through the Swift system?
So um after 911, 2 things happen is first
the United States, uh they um create a subpoena
system to uh ask for the data that Swift
has uh regarding different terrorists or uh cells that
the US government is interested in. Um And that
is facilitated in part by the fact that Swift
mirrored their data in Virginia in a, in a
data center in the United States. Um And so
at the original Swift uh access was in part
um a product of the, the location of the
data and how it's spread internationally. Um But then
uh ultimately, the, the European Union and the United
States, they sign an agreement uh that's called the
Swift agreement which allows the United States uh to
ask Swift for data for these purposes. And so
it, it institutionalizes this process and there's an important
part of that agreement which then allows European government
to basically recycle that data because Europe, because of
data privacy rules is often limited in what information
it can ask. Swift. And so, you know, the
US can ask Swift and then Europe can ask
the United States. Uh So it's kind of like
a, you know, a back door into that uh
intelligence um uh information.
And what is the role that the internet plays
in all of this? I mean, I would imagine
that of course, originally the internet was not developed
uh planning for this kind of uh control or
this kind of influence that the US now has
on uh global economy and so forth. Right? So
uh what role the uh uh uh ba basically
tell us first perhaps how the internet was developed
and then implemented and the role that it plays
uh in this uh story that you present in
the book.
Sure. So, um you know, the original concept of
the um the internet was it was based on
a decentralized structure that was intended to knit together
different networks. And that's why it's called the internet
was that there were these multiple networks um that
were based around universities largely and then also uh
nuclear scientists. Uh AND they were, they each had
their own um internal networks and they wanted to,
to uh communicate with each other. And so the,
the protocols that were created to run the internet
were often based on the assumption that the system
would be decentralized and that there wouldn't be a
kind of a, a central uh access point or,
or points of control. Um But we've evolved from
that to place where um the core infrastructures of
the internet are now quite centralized. So if you
look at your phone, you know, it's, it's either
being operated by Apple or Google. It's on a
chip that's made by Samsung or TS MC. And
if you make a financial transaction on your phone,
it's run through, you know, you know, paypal Visa
or maybe one of 10 very large banks. Um
And so that even though the, the idea was
decentralized, originally, the architecture that we have evolved into
is highly focused on these firms that are monetizing
the internet. Um And then there's also in addition
to that, those sometimes people call them platform uh
companies, there's also the the the infrastructure has also
re centralized. So uh where we used to have
laptops, where all our data was stored on the
laptop, we now often rely on what's called the
cloud. Um But as we describe in the book,
the cloud is not actually in the cloud, it's
mostly really close to Washington DC in a town
called Ashburn, Virginia where there are just miles and
miles of data centers. Um And that physical concentration
of um of data, it has also re centralized
these these systems.
And I would imagine that in the case of
the internet, it's not only the fact that over
time it became more centralized, but also, I mean,
since the internet is virtually everywhere, now, it's also
the huge amount of information that people or government
institutions and so on can gather through the internet,
right? That's also true that just more and more
people are on it. And more information is being
generated.
Mhm. Uh So, and, and just to go back
to one of the points you made there about
the internet, it was then or original originally at
least supposed to be an open network. Correct.
Yes, it's still, I mean, it's still an open
network. I think that um so the, the main
difference is is that, so one of the questions
is openness. Can anybody join this network? And today
in the internet, at least the way we have
it right now, it's still largely an open network.
There are some countries that uh um limit access
or, you know, toggle uh internet, the internet on
and off. Um But in general, the protocols allow
anybody to join and to build onto um the
system. Uh But the economic environment, the ecosystem that
has uh evolved, concentrates activity through these, it funnels
the information through these uh large concentrated companies. And
the the infrastructure also funnels the data through the
physical locations like the um the the data center
hubs.
So let's go back to 911. Then you, you've
already mentioned a few things about what happened after
the response to it. But let's get back to
the beginning. So what happened immediately in the aftermath
of 911? And what were the original intentions of
the US government?
Yes. So I think um you know, in that
moment, these bureaucracies are really scrambling and they're trying
to figure out how can they bring their own
resources to bear on this, um very uh tragic
and very uh important problem that the United States
faces. Uh AND what they, you know, whether it's
the Treasury or the NSA uh or other uh
parts of the US government, they identify these economic
networks which, you know, really had grown in the
period before 911, in the 19 nineties. Uh And
so many of these agencies, they were not, they,
they had not been using these for decades and
decades, but these were kind of new facts on
the ground and they were putting the drawing the,
the, the lines together. And what you see is
that from Treasury to the NSA, they, they see
these maps and then they start to think about
two things. Uh ONE, how can they use them
to surveil uh and get information about these uh
terrorist networks. And then the second is how can
they um uh eliminate access for these networks to
uh bad actors? Uh And so, uh you get
a set of new laws under the US government,
the Patriot Act, there's a bunch of new rules
about financial um uh uh tracking and sanctions and
those acts give the United States government new authority
to then do these things to monitor and then
also to um to, to, to choke off access
from these networks and, and many of those um
uh tactics that were then developed under 911, they
then get used against um AAA host of, of
other problems that arise. So the next one that
comes up is uh nonproliferation and North Korea, a
similar set of issues with Iran. Uh And you
see where the swift system been used to monitor
terrorists in the post 911 period, it then becomes
used to cut off access to Iranian banks in
the run up to negotiations with Iran over its
nuclear program. And so the legacies of those moments
after 911 are really still with us today.
A and so would you say that the at
least the original intentions were good or not?
Um Yes, I mean, I think that the original
tensions uh were good. And II, I think um
our book is not really trying to say that
the United States um is evil or it's bad.
You know, what we really want to just say
is this, it's, we often use the, the image
of like a superhero, like there's a superhero that
gets these new powers and it's amazing what it
can do with those powers. And there's that moment
where there can be hubris, where the powers can
become overwhelming and they can be used uh without
fully thinking through, you know, what are the consequences
of using these powers. And so the point of
our book is not to say that the US
is bad or it um is always making mistakes
is just that um there's a risk if there's
no framework. If there's no architecture to put over
how these powers are used, it could spiral out
of control. Uh And that's really the, the goal
is to say, we don't think you can put
these, you're never gonna put these back in a
box. You know, it's like you can't get rid
of this. The world is riddled with these choke
points that can be manipulated. Um And so we
need a, we need to make everybody aware of
that. And then think through how do we create
a strategy, a system and architecture uh that leads
to their use for good. Um WHICH I think
the original uses were for good. You know, they
were trying to protect the United States from terrorist
attacks. And um that really was uh I think
a noble cause.
Uh BUT when it comes to the original goals
that the US government had to fight back against
terrorism in the aftermath of 911, were those goals
uh met or not?
I mean, I think, I think primarily they were
met the um the uh use of those tools,
at least, you know, I'm not a terrorist expert.
So I, you know, I there's a bigger debate
about that but I think the Al Qaeda financial
network was severely dismantled and hampered uh because of
these efforts. Um And so I think it was,
it wasn't the sole reason uh why the United
States was able to um you know, minimize the
threat from Al Qaeda but it was an important
component in it.
Mhm So uh when it comes to these global
networks that we've been talking about and uh the
global economy more generally, uh in the book, you
also talk about how uh the US can make
use of these global networks to, for example, cut
entire countries out of the global economy. So could
you tell us a little bit about that and
perhaps give us an example?
Sure. So um I mean, I think the uh
the clearest example that we discussed in, well, I
think there's two powerful examples. The first is the
Iran sanctions um that were put in place both
in the run up to the nuclear negotiations. Um
And then also the um they, they snapped back
into place under the Trump administration. And so that
I think it's, it's a a powerful example where
the United States and in part with its allies
in Europe, uh use these tools in order to
really constrain Iran's economic um activity. The more recent
example is if uh is the US and European
efforts to um limit Russia's economic capacity. Uh I
think the the clearest example was when E Europe
and the United States together froze the um add
the foreign assets of the Russian Central Bank. So
there were about $300 billion worth of assets um
that they were uh they froze together. Um And
they're both pretty remarkable actions, you know, uh when
you think about neither, in neither case, were there
any boots on the ground or, you know, military
activity? But they were able to have quite significant
um economic consequences.
And uh I mean, looking at the broader global
picture in terms of the several the other big
countries out there, is there anyone apart from the
US that can also have a, in an influence
over these global networks, like for example, China or
some other country?
Yes. So I think there's no question that the
European Union can um it often pretends that it
doesn't and it wants to, you know, play like
uh oh we're just this little guy, you know,
um but when you think about the original swift
sanctions against Iran, they were actually through a European
Union um directive the United States pushed and wanted
and you know, was like saying we, we, you
know, we want this to happen but they actually
implemented many of those uh sanctions that cut Iranian
banks off of the network. And the similar thing
for the Russian Russia sanctions, we see whether it's
the European Central Bank or the insurance companies that
are part of the oil cap. They are all
places where there are very large European that play
a central role in many of these networks and
they also um can have power. I think that
the European issue is more about the, the politics
of it, the governance. Um WHERE, because of the
European Union, it's a less centralized process. And so
um it's less about the, the capacity uh and
more about the political will. Um In, in the
case of China, I think um it's a, it's
a case where China often uses economic coercion. Uh
uh BUT most of it is a more traditional
form of economic coercion, which I, you know, Henry
and I would call market access. You know, they
say you, you're telling us that COVID maybe started
in China, Australia. Well, then we're not going to
buy your coal. You know, that's, that's a very
standard form of economic coercion and they do it
quite a lot. Um And, but they also there's
um pain associated with that. So they don't get
the coal from Australia. And that, in that case,
China ultimately backed down because they needed um that
for their steel factories. Um I think the, the
will China be able to create these kinds of
economic networks that would then have this type of
power? Uh There, there are cases where they are
definitely trying to do that if you think about
um the five G network. Uh AND uh Huawei,
you know, that is one of those places where
they are doing that. Another place um is the
port system, the, the, there's a company called Costco,
which is state owned enterprise and they're working to
invest in European and global ports uh in the
same kind of way. Uh All that being said,
I think we shouldn't underestimate China's capability because ultimately
this type of power that Henry and I describe
is it relies on very big, very strong private
companies that other people depend on. And that can
be quite challenging for the Chinese government because they
do not really necessarily want large um uh powerful
economic companies for their domestic stability. So if you
think about the story of Alibaba, it's a technology
company, it's very, it was, it was poised to
be one of these kinds of companies. They had
a financial uh application called ant Financial. That was
really gonna challenge I think paypal and um the
likes of Western payment systems, but the owner of
that company got very, I mean, he wasn't even
that politically, you just, you know, he criticized the
Chinese government. Um AND then he was disappeared, you
know, for multiple months and the company was slowly
dismantled. Um And so I think that shows you
that there is, it's not as easy for a
lot of people say, well, if the US has
all this power, why doesn't Europe or China just
have their own version of these things? And a
lot of times domestic politics gets in the way
uh because building powerful economic centers is not always
in the interest of the state. Um AND sometimes
just, you know, other domestic political issues get in
the way. Uh So if you take Brexit, you
know, it's one of the biggest uh wounds to
Europe's ability to play in the same space. Uh,
IS that the, the British left? But, but not
because of this story, they left because of an
internal fight in the Conservative Party in Britain. So
you, you never know, um, uh, what can get
in the way of this kind of uh this
kind of power?
And I would imagine that in that particular case,
when it comes to the European Union and China
specifically, uh it's also the fact that it's not
uh neither of their currencies being used as uh
global currencies, right?
Yes, I mean, I think that when, so one
of the things that we try to explain Henry
and I in the book is that there's not
one global network, you know, it's not like the
US controls all the global economy and there's multiple
networks. And so the dollar is one, the telecommunication
systems, the production, you know, supply chains and in
the, in the dollar, in the, in the the
reserve currency domain, um there isn't a substitute for
the US dollar. Uh And that is in part
because of um because of Brexit uh the, the,
you know, the weakening of the Euro financial community,
it's also part of the, the um the sovereign
debt crisis that happened in Europe, you know, that,
that the political support for AAA really a global
currency has not been fully established around the Euro.
And in China, it's not a convertible currency. Uh
AND the efforts to internationalize, particularly around Hong Kong
um have really been undermined in the last several
years. There was a set of democracy protests in
Hong Kong. Uh AND then the government cracked down
on that and then they used I think zero
COVID as another way to kind of put pressure
on Hong Kong. And you see that, that um
it, it's just not the same vibrant um you
know, international market that it was or you know,
if, if they had wanted to be a challenge
to the US dollar, they would have used Hong
Kong and that in a more strategic way. But
instead it also presented domestic political uh issues that
then they um they, they chose to address those.
And how do you look at the political relationship
between the United States and China? Would you classify
it as an imperial struggle in any way?
I mean, uh so we are really focused on
that relationship in that we see it as two
very powerful states that have, it's, it's a, in
some ways it's an unprecedented relationship for modern uh
uh global politics. Because if you think about the
Cold War, there were two great powers, but they
were independent from each other economically, they had very
few economic relations. And then in the the period
of like, you know, mega globalization, we had no
real rivalry. You know, the United States was basically
the only true global power and the world was
very interdependent economically. So now we're entering a phase
where you have these, you know, the, the, the,
the the rivalry that we saw in the Cold
War, but we have interdependence that we saw in
that hyper globalization moment. And so what we're worried
about is that, you know, that this relationship, that
the kind of the, the more national security, the
more rivalry aspects will um escalate and these powers
that we identify in our book will be used
in a way that could unravel the economic interdependence.
And um I think Henry and I want to
say globalization, it creates vulnerabilities. There's no question about
that. Uh But we don't need to throw the
whole thing out. You know, there's plenty of places
where there's not uh a security risk. And so
if, if we, if we don't do that in
a very thoughtful way, the, the concerns about those
vulnerabilities could, could overwhelm uh our capacity to just
to protect uh the globalization enterprise.
But taking into account those vulnerabilities that you're mentioning
there. Do you look at globalization as a net
positive or a net negative?
So I, I mean, I, I think globalization is
a net positive. I mean, if you think about
even just the um the transformation and poverty in
China uh since it entered the global economy, it's
um it's tremendous. So I, I definitely, I believe
that globalization is a net positive but um it
doesn't have its problems and if we don't address
them, it could lead to the unraveling of globalization.
Um And in particular, these, these economic security issues,
they become very difficult because all of a sudden,
um it's not just that globalization isn't delivering, you
know, that was the, the kind of the, the,
the, the central concern of the 19 nineties was
that there was inequality um or that it was
not, you know, the, the wealth that was being
generated wasn't being uh properly shared. But here, the
new concern is that globalization can be a vector
uh of attack, you know, and so that, that
really is a much more trouble. I mean, inequality
is also a very troubling issue. We should address
that too. But for policymakers when they see, you
know, I'm opening my market and then, then that
could hurt me. Um That's, I think that's a
very difficult position to be in to say, OK,
we're gonna, we're gonna do this, but we're going
to have to need to protect ourselves at the
same time.
Uh Wouldn't you say that perhaps one of the
biggest vulnerabilities in globalization is the fact that it's
very easy or fairly easy to disrupt uh commerce
and uh chains of different kinds of goods that
perhaps many different countries are dependent on because they
don't because they are being part of this global
economy. Of course, they don't produce everything that they
need in their own territory.
Right. Yes. I mean, I think, um, one of
the, one of the remarkable things about globalization, I
think, and that we have to remember is how
little disruption there has been. You know, if you
think about the last, you know, from the 19
eighties to 40 years, how many times could you
not get what you needed on a day to
day basis? You know, I, I grew up in
a, in a world where you couldn't get avocados,
you know, like, unless it was a very special
time, you know, that was like, I grew up
in Columbus, Ohio. We, you know, I remember my
mother bringing home a kiwi and saying, you know,
this is a really special thing, you know, like
uh now you go to, you know, we're very
privileged where, you know, to live in a, a
very wealthy society, but there's like a wall of
pineapples at the store every time you go, you
know, so I think we should, we need to
uh not lose sight of how remarkable uh globalization
is and how it has created a lot of,
of just average opportunity for consumers. What I think
the uh and, and, and, and the way it
has accomplished that is that in many places, it
creates multiple suppliers so that if one supplier falls
out the market has another buyer for that, you
know, seller for that product. Um And so, you
know, you have these global markets that then create
resilience. The issue is is that in some markets,
not all of them, you have had hyper specialization
that to a point where only a few companies
are capable of making the product that is necessary.
So if you think about TS MC or Apple
and Google with the operating systems, um or the
banks, the global banks, there are a few people
that can replace those companies. So if, if something
happens to them, um then the global economy can
be in trouble. And that's where, then these, the,
the governments have recognized that as to, to understand
that these certain um market uh players cannot be
substitute. And that's why they are so powerful if
they're used either for surveillance or to toggle access.
And so I don't want to paint a picture
that like globalization is rife with uh terribleness and,
you know, it's, it's, and that's why I think
we need to have a strategy to focus on
it because most of globalization, it's like the shoes,
you know, it's like they're not a security threat,
at least in my mind, you know, it was
like at the end, they're, they're also not that
vulnerable to, to supply shocks, but there are these
areas which are and that we need to um
we need to focus on them.
No, I I mean, one of the reasons why
I'm also asking you these questions is also to
dispel some of the myths and sometimes even conspiracy
theories that people develop around the concept of globalization
because sometimes they even get into things like uh
it being a threat to national sovereignty of different
countries and sometimes individual liberties. So I, I guess
it's important also to really uh explain how things
really work in globalization.
Right. Definitely. Mhm.
So let's get into the last point of our
interview that I would like to explore here. So
taking into account these global networks, the global economy
and so on in what ways do you think
we could leverage them in the, in the service
of something other than imperialism that would perhaps better
serve the interests of uh the global population?
Yes. So I think the most important thing is
that uh we need to think about wrapping the
use of these tools uh in legitimacy and that
can come in a, in a number of different
ways. Uh But the, the p the problem is
when power is used, uh you know, just with
soul power and that then comes across as imperialism
because people are not on board. And then they're
saying the only reason I'm doing this is because
you're forcing me to do it. I think there
are a number of um you know, you can
use many examples of what has the United States
tried to do with these powers. It's everything from
um tried to confront terrorism to prevent the spread
of weapons of mass mass destruction. To um respond
to territorial aggression in the case of Ukraine um
to uh to fight human rights abuses in China
and other places. Uh It, it, I think it
could be used to deal with the climate crisis.
It could also be used to deal with corruption
issues, all of these things. It's not the topic.
That is the problem. You know, it's not like,
well, anybody that tries to deal with uh nuclear
proliferation is an imperialist. For me, it's about how
do you create a consensus in the global community
that this is something that we all need to
address. Uh And so the more that these powers
are used unilaterally without some kind of coalition building,
I think the more likely it is that there
will be a backlash to their use. Um And
so that's where I think, um you know, you
can see things that create a lot of friction.
Like when the Trump administration withdrew from the J
CPO A and forced the sanctions back on European
firms. It was a moment where, you know, Europe
realized it couldn't do anything. It was, it was
impotent to respond to that moment and it was
against Europe's preferences. And there was very little consultation.
It was, you know, it seemed like a, you
know, that decision you could have imagined it have
have rolled out in a different way where there
would have been less of a rupture if it
had been done with some kind of diplomatic uh
conversation. I think the same kind of thing with
the Russia sanctions. On the one hand, I think
they were remarkable in the way the US government
worked with European allies to do it in co
ordination with each other. And it was not the
US government saying we're gonna do this and you
know that it was very much a collaborative um
enterprise. And in that way, I think it was
on one hand, much more, less imperial than it
could have been. On the other hand, I think
the Russia sanctions, uh its limitation have been, it's
the way the West has communicated them to the
rest of the world. And so you see countries
like um Indonesia or Saudi Arabia or Brazil saying,
why should we do this? What are we, what
do we get from this uh a action? And
even could we be threatened by it? You know,
when uh the European Union puts the, the oil
cap in place, you see countries like Indonesia saying,
well, are you gonna do that for other commodities,
you know, create a cap, a price cap? Like
that's that, that's kind of scary for us. So
I think the um a lot of times the
US or Europe acts and thinks it's just doing
good stuff. Um BUT it needs to create the
political will and legitimacy globally uh to, to, to,
to wrap around that action so that it's not
seen as just the brute force power?
Mhm So one last question then looking mainly at
the current uh political uh context globally, do you
look at the way we could or should leverage
these global networks optimistically or more pessimistically?
So I um I think you can see that
policymakers are are focusing more and more on this
question. So the European Union released uh an economic
security agenda. It was about a year ago, it
was in June where they start to say, OK,
the world is a vulnerable place. We do need
to address these issues because I think it's also
it's Pollyanna to think that these aren't there. They,
we do need to them and they started to
lay out kind of like a framework for when
would we use these types of powers? How could
we use them? So I think that's a very
encouraging um effort. You see the Biden administration in
the United States doing a number of things that
are trying to um embed this use of power
in constraints of saying we're not going to just
do this alone, we're going to uh not do
it for everything. So they uh in the semiconductor
space, they have tried to work with Japan and
um the Netherlands in a collective or coordinate way
as they impose export controls on China. It's an
example where I think previous administrations might have just
done it by themselves. And so that's like a
that's a way to um constrain these powers. Similarly,
the Biden administration has described what they call um
a small yard high fence approach to technological restraints
on China. They're trying to say we're not going
to do this everywhere. You know, we're, we're, we're
going to limit our actions into these most threatening
areas. So I think those are all really good
examples of policymakers trying to limit the fallout from
using these tools. At the same time. I think
like the glass half empty approach is um we're
still using them. I think in AAA pretty crisis
response type of way and things that we thought
were the ceiling of the types of power that
we would use are becoming the floor. You know,
we used to really worry about using the swift
system uh as a tool. Now, you know, we're
using central bank reserves as you know, freezing assets.
It's like that's like way that the current question
is, will we take those central bank assets that
we froze from Russia and give them to Ukraine?
That's unprecedented. You know, that's really a very radical
step. So I think we still need to have
um like a strategic doctrine or an international law
of economic coercion where we say this is what's
this is what is proportional, this is what is
responsible use of these things. Um And that's why
Henry and I wrote this book was to start
a debate and say, you know, th this transformation
is happening in the world, you see it in
export controls and sanctions in all these different tremors.
But they're really connected. And if we don't have
a, a common conversation about them, uh things could,
could get out of control.
So I guess that's a great note to end
on. And the book, the book is again, Underground
Empire. How America weaponize the world economy. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description box of
the interview. And Dr Newman, just before we go
apart from the book, would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Sure. So I am at Georgetown University. Uh You
could find me there. Uh OR I'm also, I'm
actually not on Twitter anymore. I'm not doing that
anymore. So you could just find me on, on
the Georgetown website and I'm happy to answer questions
that people have.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Great talking to you too. And thanks again for
the excellent questions and a great conversation.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon. Or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S
Friends, David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed
YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca, Beto Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary
FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georges, Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter. Wo
David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior,
Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica, a week in the B brand
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca, Toni, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.